---
title: "Day 5?"
kind: essay
date: 2016-12-19
lang: en
featured: false
draft: true
---

This endeavor almost ended as many others I said I would do and didn’t. You know, because of fear. It’s has been like a lot of days since I started this journey of professional self-growth. I thought I wouldn’t finish. I thought this will be another of the things you fail Mari, face it, you are a failure.

But I kept going, and somewhere I ended hooked with the process and I am enjoying so much right now. Best part is that I don’t ask myself if this job is the one I should be doing or whether how much I am growing doing it. Because now I turn to [hackerrank](https://www.hackerrank.com/domains/tutorials/cracking-the-coding-interview) and solve problems when I am bored, and then look for the different ways people solve the same problem and how disparate the solutions are from mine.

I am almost done with Bentley’s Programming pearls. And believe all the article that said he is king (I think it was a Quora answer). I love it. I didn’t mind some solutions might seem outdated, on the contrary find it quite practical.

A friend of mine send me the Cracking the coding interview training course in hackerrank. And I started working through the problems and now I am almost done with that path. It’s has been quite refreshing and made long for those days at the uni where we do programming contests. And although none of this translates directly to my day-to-day job and I am not sure is compounding in any way, I think it’s valuable and more than anything has revived a spark in me and made want to solve problems like I used to. Following the same highway I met with GeeksForGeeks, another great resource for practicing and comparing solutions. I always try to do the exercise myself first and then after my solution is accepted check for other solutions.

Going through videos and articles on hackerrank I found a really awesome compilation of stuff to watch out. The author called it the [Google Interview University](https://github.com/jwasham/google-interview-university). Forget the name and the his purpose, it’s an awesome compilation of material to look and practice. It covers a LOT of stuff I probably don’t need or for the moment I am not particular interested, overall is a great resource and I already started watching some of the videos that are short and don’t need me to be in front of the computer on my commute time.

I have also read [Freakonomics](http://freakonomics.com/) and Think like a freak, both by the same authors. Additionally I started a diary to keep track of my day and emotions, although I sure don’t write everyday I keep him informed of the things going on around me and in my mind. And last but not least, I keep my Yoga 45 morning routine, which has turn out to be great. And of course, my job.

*What am I missing?*

Measure. They say that what you can’t measure, you can’t manage. I am wanting to start measuring my progress. As I don’t have a specific goal is really hard to measure anything when you only say **I want to improve**. So I guess that’s the first step. This year I have been keeping track of things that are really useful and that can come handy at work. Like unix commands for greping the logs for an exception or translating rows of numbers to comma separated values, or my git workflow, solution for that problem that scratch my head. I thought that maybe it’s time to move that kind of thing for a more appropriate place. I looked and didn’t find much, except for EMACS org mode, but I need something more ubiquitous, I have a machine for work and two at home, I don’t want to have it only when I am at work. I call it Engineering log.

What I will start doing is adding to this log my learning experience. I will use [Steve’s Five essentials](http://steve.yegge.googlepages.com/five-essential-phone-screen-questions) as a guide for starting and then will adapt. The areas are:

1.  Coding (specific tips and tricks are things that can go here)
2.  OO Design
3.  Scripting and regexes
4.  Data structures
5.  Bits and bytes

This can change later, I just want a logical way to structure my notes and some way to measure how I am progressing and what’s the next challenge that I should take according to that progress.

I think that other way of measuring might be mind maps or graph dependencies of my knowledge and practice.

That’s all for ONE day. I am really excited to all the thing I still need to practice and read. I used to feel like I will never catch up to all the guys and gals who already know stuff I don’t, so why bother at all?

Thankfully that view has changed to I want to do this for myself and nobody else.

P.S

*This started as a 66 days challenge. As I missed my writing more than 30 days, I wasn’t sure if start again or just go along. I decided to go along.*
