---
title: "Day 8"
kind: essay
date: 2016-12-23
lang: en
featured: false
draft: true
---

Solving problems or learning the theory first?

> “It is not the critic who counts; not the man who points out how the strong man stumbles, or where the doer of deeds could have done them better. The credit belongs to the man who is actually in the arena, whose face is marred by dust and sweat and blood, who strives valiantly; who errs and comes short again and again; because there is not effort without error and shortcomings; but who does actually strive to do the deed; who knows the great enthusiasm, the great devotion, who spends himself in a worthy cause, who at the best knows in the end the triumph of high achievement and who at the worst, if he fails, at least he fails while daring greatly. So that his place shall never be with those cold and timid souls who know neither victory nor defeat.” — Theodore Roosevelt

The question becomes then, should you read first and then practice or practice and then read about the subject?

In the case of programming, I have done both things, I started getting the theory first and then diving into practice. That’s the way they teach in traditional universities and I first learn programming at the university. After a while, I went to the complete opposite site of starting to tinker and then reading about the theory to find different and usually better ways to do what I just did and go and refactor part or all my code. So which one to choose. Let’s start with the definitions.

**A theory is a method we use to give us understanding.**

> \[Theory\] It provides “goals, norms, and standards”. A theory can be a [body of knowledge](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Body_of_knowledge "Body of knowledge"), which may or may not be associated with particular explanatory models. To theorize is to develop this body of knowledge.

Theory is contemplative, thoughtful and a rational explanation of the general nature of things.

We use theory to understand.

Practice is often portrayed opposed to theory, derived from the Greek *praxis*, doing. Practice is intended to understand and think as well as theory, but with an aim of a desired action.

I have found when tackling new subjects, natural languages or programming languages, that going and coming from theory to practice gives me the best results so far. I guess it depends on the goals. What I do know is that theory is great to build a foundation to practice, but alone is not a lot worth it, because as it won’t translate to experience or problem solving ability if you actually don’t solve problems.

And this takes me to the problem solving part. Recognizing patterns is a large way of solving problems. I have started to compare timings between how I think when I recognize a type of problem I have already seen, versus when I am faced with a new one, and this I have applied to my personal life as well.

But we actually need both very well balanced. To solve unknown problems you have to theorize possible scenes, possible cases when the problem can survive and also you have to have the ability to take those theory to meaningful action. It’s a translation process. And is not easy, is not intended to be, to translate the theory to the action through the practice.

That’s one of the things I want to emphasize more during this challenge. The transliteration process between a thought and the practice to turn it into code, writing, products, companies, any creation at all.

P.S

*This article is part of a 66 days challenge of coding practicing, reading and learning outside work as a software engineer. Start at* [*Day 1*](https://medium.com/66-days/day-1-fb0f1fbce484#.o7bly7ey1) *for an explanation of my motivations.*
