---
title: "Day 4"
kind: essay
date: 2016-11-02
lang: en
featured: false
shelf: archive
draft: true
---

Time to show some code, shall we?

Turns out that my *lack of accuracy in estimations* is not only to give my manager assignment and project due dates. I haven’t finished Programming Pearls in a week as I estimated will do, although I’m really enjoying it. You know, I am one of those people who likes classics and old style, and in internet life, 1986 it’s like several lifes back.

I’m over Column 4 of the book and really liked the data structure section. How clearly Bentley ilustrate the point that the data should drive your design and how designing for the specific case *N=73* instead of the general *N-case,* may be the best call in a lot of cases, and that might actually be harder. He reflects on the

> Inventor’s paradox: The more general problem might be easier to solve.

And then he goes to quote Fred Brooks on the [Mythical Man Month](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Mythical_Man-Month):

> The programmer at wit’s end for lack of space can often do best by disentangling himself from his code, rearing back and contemplating his data. Representation **is** the essence of programming.

When they decide to call it pearls was on purpose I’m sure they already knew that we’ll enjoyed. So, where is the code?

I have been uploading to my [github](https://github.com/mlescaille/66Days) account the solutions to the problems that I am tackling from the book, not all of them for sure, annnd also algorithm implementations.

Apart from the book, I spent the weekend on a marathon on Pluralsight Principles of Object Oriented Design, is basically a carry over the [SOLID](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SOLID_%28object-oriented_design%29) principles. What I liked of the videos was the real life examples of code smells and the refactoring to better design. It’s a refresher view and I liked.

I hope to write a lot more of code and do a more diverse reading, but want to keep focused andmake sure I’m not going too broad and very shallow, so will go step by step, finishing PP first.

Happy thinking and learning.
