---
title: "Day 1"
kind: essay
date: 2016-10-25
lang: en
featured: false
shelf: archive
draft: true
---

I traced the plan and committed myself of spending at least one hour for the next sixty six days coding, reading and practicing algorithms, designs systems and business related content. I don’t have a clear goal, I do want to practice outside work and keep my skills as sharp as possible.

It all started with an argument between a mother I know and her son. He was arguing he can’t possibly do all of what he has to do at school.

> And somehow that brought me to one thought: I have actually, really never studied or practiced that hard. Anything. I didn’t have to, or so I thought. I stopped writing prose, and then also stop writing poetry, for some advise if you are not dying to write it everyday don’t do it.

I wasn’t dying to write poetry eveyday, I did it when it *came* to me, when I was inspired, but mostly when an image or a thought was worth writing. That was for me. Nothing crazy. As a teenager I always envisioned myself writing books and going to books readings and that kind of stuff. I stopped.

Then programming came to me in college. I didn’t have an idea what that was. Fast forward to today.

But only until yesterday I realize I never committed to do everything in my power to learn everyday and improve my skills dramatically. I did attend some programming contest while in college and really enjoyed, but after that you just kind of get in the loop of the details of the projects and then you start working and don’t feel like practicing after work.

This is my attempt to create a new habit and to enjoy myself while coding, reading, learning and writing. The things that I absolutely love to do and not always do.

During the next 65 days I will be writing my journey here, mostly for myself with whatever I take from the experience during the day.
