---
title: "Day 7"
kind: essay
date: 2016-12-21
lang: en
featured: false
draft: true
---

> Stay with problems longer.

On my practice session yesterday I did 8 solutions to one problem. They were all not the same, some of those, were variation of one idea and others were complete fresh start from a different angle to the problem. At one point, I was like f\*\*k it, I understood the problem and have a working answer, after all this is just a practice. It’s not all practice. It’s more than that.

I am building an habit. And I don’t want a partial habit, a flawed process. The one I will end if I don’t make these practice sessions as important as a critical downtime of the systems I maintain at work. I am sure no way in the world I would give up on solving those issues. Partially for external pressure, but also because it’s my personal commitment to solve the problem completely. And I realized today that for this sessions to be as productive as I expect I have to take it to the end.

I have to give everything. Eight attempts to a single problem certainly didn’t make me feel as the smartest person in the planet, not even in the room. But I am glad I stayed with the problem to all its surprises and found out the edge cases, even if i was just practicing for myself and didn’t owe an explanation to anyone. I am glad that I found several ways to solve the problem.

People underestimate the importance of staying with problems for a long time. I know I use to. I thought that if I didn’t find a quick answer it wasn’t enough and I beat myself up.

P.S

*This article is part of a 66 days challenge of coding practicing, reading and learning outside work.*
