---
title: "Day 6"
kind: essay
date: 2016-12-20
lang: en
featured: false
draft: true
---

*This article is part of a 66 days challenge of coding practicing, reading and learning outside work.*

Two weeks ago I had my IELTS English test. On my way to the place, even if it was in a location well known, I had to fire up Google Maps. And even then I struggle to find the place, I looked like a tourist lost in the city. *Probably I am a tourist as I have been in this city more or less a year.* Back to my point, I enter the test and my listening assignment had one question, wait for it, to locate places on a map given the instructions. I thought to myself, this can’t be real. I mean if you have to test an ability, be sure to be testing that ability and not a lot other random things that the person doesn’t necessarily has to know. I understood everything that was instructed, but man, I was born lost, I lost myself in every place I go. I stared at the page with the map and didn’t write anything. I am sure I didn’t pass that one.

As I am going through problems to practice, I found one that started with poker hands or deck or something. I have never, ever played poker, it’s not a thing in my country. I am sure that the problem didn’t require my absolute knowledge in poker, but same as with my map question I stared. Just trying to wrap my head around a new context took me some time before even starting to think at the problem.

I have look at the diversity problem from so many angles, I wrote articles, did research, founded an organisation, and never occurred to me that the context of the questions can be a decisive factor when people evaluate other person’s ability to code and to understand problems.

If all the problems you are setting are based on your local, most likely North American culture, or worst on another one you just happen to understand, we can’t expect to have diverse teams.

The questions we ask are the way we have to get better answers. As Tony Robbins points out:

> *It is better to debate a question without settling it than to settling a question without debating it.”* — Joseph Joubert

I will pay more attention to this from now on, and maybe compile some of those problems text for a future article.
