---
title: "Day 9"
kind: essay
date: 2016-12-24
lang: en
featured: false
draft: true
---

> Problems are only opportunities in work clothes.– Henry Kaiser (American industrialist)

So I have the [goal](https://medium.com/66-days/day-1-fb0f1fbce484#.9v1l0bfqn), [problems](https://www.hackerrank.com) and we have the discipline to follow the practice. But what are the things that usually hinder our ability to effectively solve a problem?

I always laugh with my fellow geek friends about the PEBKAC (*problem exists between keyboard and chair*) acronym. Usually I experience this when I found the issue I am dealing with is actually in my understanding and assumptions rather than in the complexity of the problem. Rewiring my brain is part of this process of professional growth, because otherwise, my skills will be essentially the same. Isn’t part of growing to find out what is holding you back?

On Day 9, Mari did a research on what are the blocks that prevent us to find solutions and how to overcome these blocks. (A recommended book about this subject is [Conceptual Blockbusting](https://www.amazon.com/Conceptual-Blockbusting-Guide-Better-Ideas/dp/0738205370) by James Adams).

**Common barriers to problem solving**

1.  Confirmation bias. Generally unconscious observing and experimenting in such a way that favors a *preconceived* notion. This can happen with or without motivation by the solver.
2.  Mental Set. Inclination to attempt to solve problems in such a way that has proved successful in previous experiences. Basically if you solved a similar problem once, you will try to fixed the previous solution to the current problem, even if your perceiving it doesn’t fit quite well.
3.  Functional fixedness: Difficulty conceiving new use for familiar objects/Use of a familiar object in an unfamiliar context. This was the most interesting one for me and I encourage to go and read the whole page in [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Functional_fixedness) and look more about this. It’s very common.
4.  Unnecessary constraints. The glorious things that you imagine that are in the problem which in fact, puts you in a closed position and closed thinking.
5.  Irrelevant information. This can be a though barrier because is hard to recognize what information is irrelevant to solving a problem as we are used per evaluation systems in school methods to make use of all of the details given to solve a problem. It’s very important to identify the irrelevant information in problem solving.

#### How can we avoid this barriers?

We should remodel our brain city to support barriers. Be able to acknowledge their existence is the very first step. Other techniques involve:

Looking beyond the original use of the items at hand.

Decoupling function from its form. Divide the problem into smaller problems, see if you have a solution or another way of looking at the sub-problem . I think this applies more to the tools at hand. In what other ways can these tools be used? How can they be combined beyond their described intended use?

Analyzing the problem/tools and break it down to its parts and then explore the possible functions of those parts.

Representing the problem in other context, for example: if it is a complex worded problem, try to visualize the situation and to weed out possible irrelevant information.

This is only a primer in cognitive biases. A lot of this notions have held me back in the past when looking at problems, both in my personal live and solving problems at work. I am sure I will get back at this as I will continue looking for ways to identify my cognitive biases and to overcome them.

P.S

*This article is part of a 66 days challenge of coding practicing, reading and learning outside work.*
